He was literally two days away from
dying. So, this is a story where a
15-year-old boy was diagnosed with blood
cancer, but he developed a flesheating
infection in his lung. He wasn't going
to make it. So, he has one request. He
wants to go outside. And that's exactly
what they do. And this was actually
mind-blowing to me. After the second
day, the infection is probably 60 70%
gone. And it became clear to me that
sunlight has so many important benefits.
For instance, if you're the bed closer
to the window, you get discharged from
the hospital faster.
>> So, I want you to give me any
information you have as it relates to
light health. For example, do you
recommend these kinds of things?
>> Dr. Roger Seahol is a board-certified
critical care physician who breaks down
complex science into clear life-saving
advice. I see people at the very end of
their lives, so I know what prevents
them from getting this ill and how to
extend life. So, let's distill it down
into eight pillars. The first thing that
exercise it reduces stroke. It reduces
depression. Next, sunlight. Did you know
that infrared light from the sun is able
to penetrate up to about 8 mm and
stimulate and upregulate melatonins
which prevent a lot of diseases like
dementia, cardiovascular disease,
diabetes?
>> What if you live in a cloudy country?
>> There's some very actionable things that
you can do and we'll talk about that.
Next one, water. For instance, people
who use sauna are more likely to have
less death from cardiovascular disease.
Next, air. There are studies that show
that just going out one day a week can
elevate our immune system and make us
more relaxed. And then there's
but finally trust. This is something
that can't be ignored because studies
have shown that people who have a good
faith and trust in a god hard.
I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you
[Music]
Dr. Roger Schwelt. with the work that
you do. What is it that you're aiming to
accomplish?
>> Outside of my clinical duties, uh, and
maybe even part of that, I would like to
clearly
explain
very easily graspable tools that can be
implemented to make people live their
best life. And it's specifically in
terms of their health and their
well-being. And as we dig down into
health and wellbeing, because that's
quite a broad basket, what is it within
health and well-being that you've spent
your career, your life focusing on?
>> So, I'm a a board-certified internal
medicine specialist. Then, I did an
extra three years of training uh here in
the United States on pulmonary and
critical care. So, I deal with all of
the issues that are related to the lungs
and the critical care aspect. So, if you
are uh if you are admitted to hospital
and you're critically ill, you go to the
intensive care unit, I'm the doctor that
you see. So, I'm putting in, you know,
the lines, putting them on vasopressors,
intubating them. I worked in the clinic
this morning.
>> And what are some of the unappreciated
things that most people don't think of?
Because we think of, you know, don't eat
processed food and,
>> right,
>> exercise, but is there things outside of
that that you don't think the average
person appreciates enough?
>> Yes, absolutely.
>> What are those things? So if we look at
those things that extend life and are
beneficial, we could put them into what
I call eight pillars of health. If you
can imagine your life is a chain with a
bunch of links, okay? And I'm talking
medically. Each one of those links is an
organ system. So your heart is a link,
your lungs are a link, your liver is a
link, your kidneys, etc., etc.
As you go through life, imagine those
links starting to erode. So that at some
point in your life, you're going to get
some sort of a disease or a diagnosis
that focuses on one organ system of your
life. For many here in the United States
and in the UK, it's the heart. And as
that link gets more eroded, we can see
very clearly that this is going to be
the link that's going to break first.
And therefore, attention is paid to that
link. For many that diagnosis comes with
medications. So here here is one of the
first truisms that I would say going
forward. All medications have side
effects. And what the aim is to do in
modern medicine is to utilize the
knowledge of those medicines and their
effect on the human body so that we
leverage the other links to protect that
weakest link. So, I could go through a
bunch of medications that I give all the
time to patients in the intensive care
unit where I'm focused on saving their
life because I can clearly see which
link is the weakest, but I'm doing it
knowing that there's side effects
because I'm trying to save that link to
save that life and I'm leveraging those
other things. For instance, somebody
comes in with a stroke and uh they have
they've they've lost weakness on the on
the right side of their body or the left
side, whichever side. I can give them a
medication
immediately that will break up all of
the clots in their body. It's called TPA
or TNK. And it will restore blood flow
to the brain and it will reverse many of
their symptoms. If they come in soon
enough, we can do this.
What's what's amazing is that that
medication has an effect that can do
that, but it also has a pretty
significant side effect and that it
could break up clots somewhere else and
cause bleeding. So, we have to be
careful about what it is that we're
doing. Clearly there what we're doing is
we're saving one link at the expense of
other links. But that's what you have to
do in an emergency situation. But if
after that I simply send that patient
home without telling them why they had
that stroke and what they need to do to
prevent themselves from getting that
stroke again and what are the lifestyle
factors that cause that to happen. I
haven't done my job. So what is what are
the interventions that we can do
hopefully early on in life so that we
don't have those links eroding so that
all of the links are strong and as we
get older we can continue to strengthen
all of the links. Here are the eight. So
nutrition that's that's nutrition. Uh
basically you know we know there are
studies that have done that show that
that depending on what we put into our
bodies as food can have a dramatic
impact in terms of our well-being. Okay
so that's nutrition. Exercise as I was
saying exercise not only I mean drugs
and things have side effects. Exercise
have side benefits. So exercise
obviously is going to make you more fit.
It's going to make you have better
endurance. But did you know that it
reduces stroke? Did you know that it
improves uh um well-being? It reduces
depression. There's so many benefits.
So, all of these links are actually
improving. There's no leveraging here.
And exercise is incredible. Water. So,
this may sound obvious, right? Like you
drink because you're thirsty. Where I
would like to go today is to talk a
little bit about what the effect of
water externally on your body can do.
>> And you're talking there about like hot
and cold.
>> Exactly.
>> Usage.
>> Exactly. in terms of showers or cold
plunges, sauners, that kind of thing.
>> Exactly.
>> And we'll get into the actual evidence
for this.
>> We'll get into it later. But what is
>> this affects your immune system
>> which changes your probability of
diseases and things like that.
>> Absolutely. Especially in the acute
setting, especially so not only in the
acute setting, but we also have pretty
good data from Finland where they have
more saunas than almost than people uh
where they've actually done the research
and and shown with dose response curves
that this is actually very beneficial.
We won't get into too much of that, but
what I want to focus a little bit more
on because of my job in the intensive
care unit and what we're seeing right
now with viruses and mutations in the
innate immune system, why something like
this may actually be very important uh
as we look forward. Interestingly, as we
look forward to future things,
pandemics, we can look backward and see
what we had done in the past. And we've
got some really actually really good
information on that. Let's go to
sunlight. This is something that um I've
really become more and more involved
with because of some of the benefits
that this can do. A very big
misconception that people have is that
sunlight equals vitamin D. And
therefore, if you take a vitamin D
supplement, you don't need to go in the
sun. This is really something that's now
um being debunked. Sunlight has far more
benefits than just vitamin D. Not saying
that vitamin D is is not something that
you want to supplement with. I
supplement with vitamin D. I think it's
there's a benefit to supplementing with
vitamin D. No question. But sunlight has
so many important things. And I and I
really would like to spend the bulk or
the line share of the time talking about
this because this is really important.
>> Um
this is a this is this is amazing. Uh
and it really made me think about
sunlight. So, this is a story by a lady
by the name of Amy Hanmeer. Her
15-year-old boy was diagnosed with
lymphablastic leukemia. Went into uh the
hospital actually started chemotherapy
for it
>> which is blood cancer.
>> It's a blood cancer. Yeah. And so this
the treatment for blood cancer is
chemotherapy which he started. The side
effect of chemotherapy is suppressing
the immune system. And unfortunately, he
didn't realize it, but he developed uh
he didn't realize it immediately, but he
developed a a fungus flesh-eating
infection in his lung and went into the
hospital in June of 2024.
Uh this was in Minnesota, tertiary care
hospital. and he got worse and got worse
and got worse to the point where the
only way that they could control this
infection was to actually remove his
left lung, which they did. So, this is a
15-year-old boy. He is without his left
lung. He only has a right lung and he
starts to decline even after that. They
do a CT scan and it shows that now the
infection has moved to the his remaining
right lung. They have a family
conference
and as Amy is telling me this story, I
could hear her choking up. She's telling
me this on the phone. She's saying that
he's 15. He's completely awake. He's
completely alert. He knows everything
that's going on around him. He's on a
ventilator, like a machine that they use
for for sleep apnea. It's like a Bip
machine that's breathing for him. It's
not intubation, but it's on his on his
mouth. And the doctors, you know, have
done everything they possibly can and
they say, "Look, he's getting worse. We
can't take obviously we can't take the
right lung out. We can't put him on a
heart lung machine because there's no
sort of destination to where he's going.
U we recommend not intubating him and
making him what they call DNR. Do not
resuscitate.
So they're like, "Wow, they were not
expecting this coming." So they have a
big conference somebody they they call
in help to like how do you explain to a
15-year-old boy that you're dying and
how how is that going to feel?
So they ask the doctors how how much
time does he have? They say two days.
So in this in this situation,
they ask this boy, okay, you're going to
die. What do you want to do with your
life in the in the next two days? What
do you want to do? And surprisingly, he
says, I want to go outside.
I just want to go outside. This this guy
grew up probably on a farm or something,
and he spend his time outside. So, he
wants to go outside. So, you know how I
mean, I don't know if you know this, but
like if you're a nurse or you're a
doctor and you've done everything you
can and this and you're just completely
horrified at the fact that this
15-year-old is going to die and he has
one request. You're going to move heaven
and earth to fulfill that one request.
And that's exactly what they do. They
get this boy the hospital bed outside.
He's on a BPA machine the respiratory
therapists have put together. So this
guy is outside
and they're not putting him outside to
get better. He's just This is his dying
wish. They also use this thing called a
Firefly. It's like a light device that
they were using. I to I'll be honest, I
don't know which did it.
>> The Firefly. What's that?
>> It's a It's a light device that gives
off light at different wavelengths and
they would use that for about three
times a day for five minutes.
This guy does not die.
After the first day, his white count
starts to come down. That's like a
measure of the infection that's going on
in the lung. And and by the way, they do
a CT scan of his lung before this all
starts. And and it's just the the the
remaining lung on the right is just
filled with infection. It's horrible.
By the by the second day, the white
count comes down even more. And there,
by the way, they haven't changed any of
the other treatment. He's been in by
this point he's been in for 6 weeks. He
has not seen the light of day and and
he's still getting the powerful
antifungal medication amphoterosin B and
posonazol. All of these things are are
really high powered drugs that that just
completely fight fungus, but it's not
working. He's getting worse. But now
he's out for the second day. The white
count's coming down, which is good. Not
it's a good sign. His oxygen requirement
is coming down. That's a good sign. He's
requiring less and less oxygen. By the
time he gets to day five, okay, we're
already past 2 days. He's off the BiPAP.
He's on regular just nasal canula oxygen
that you see people wearing on their
nose. The doctors are scratching their
head. They're like, "We we should get a
CT scan to see what's going on." So, so
Amy tells me that they they get a CT
scan of this guy and they're in the room
and some some even like swear under
their breath like they they're
completely
amazed because on the CT scan obviously
the left lung is still gone but the
right lung the disease is probably 60
70% gone and
he he's still alive. He goes home.
There's no sign of the disease after
after treatment. And he he uh I I just
she just uh communicated with me to tell
me that he just got his make a wish uh
thing for for his cancer. He's
continuing treatment and to and she just
can't believe that he was literally two
day two days away from dying. They
changed nothing. They changed none of
his treatments. The only thing that they
did was they took him outside and they
they were using this Firefly before
inside, but they were using it more
consistently when he got outside.
>> Maybe hospitals should be outside.
>> This is exactly what Okay, so if you
wanted to know what my drive was, what
what it is my purpose that I'm doing
right now, I'm working at three
different hospitals and I'm trying to
work in each of those three different
hospitals to try to get patients
outside. The biggest barrier that we
have is staff taking those patients
outside. That's the thing that's the
hardest. But this is what we used to do,
Stephen. This is what we used when we
built hospitals at the turn of the
century. We had hospital rooms where
beds could be taken out onto the veranda
and people could get sunlight. I would
love to see a time where we could go
back to that type of uh effect. There's
studies that have been done. People in a
two-bed room, if you're the bed closer
to the window, you get discharged from
the hospital faster on average.
>> Really?
>> Yes.
>> I need to swap sides of the bed with my
girlfriend.
She's on the sunny side.
>> There there's so much evidence for this.
People who are in hospitals that are
have bigger windows, they give better
surveys. And hospitals uh reimbursement
is tied to the surveys that they get
from patients. So, it's literally a
win-winwin. If hospitals started to, I
believe, get patients outside and and
they're already doing this there. I
don't want to say that this isn't
happening. There are hospitals that are
have programs to get patients outside.
Um, I think we just ought to be doing it
a lot more.
Um,
temperance.
>> Temperance. What does that mean?
>> It's an old term, isn't it? It really
means moderation. And and I I would say
in this sense temperance really means to
uh avoid toxins in the body. Um as
somebody who is a pulmonologist who is
>> what's a pulmonologist?
>> Pulmonologist is someone who takes care
of the lungs. And so as a result of that
I see a lot of issues uh with lung
cancer related to smoking. Um I see in
the intensive care unit people with
liver failure as a result of of alcohol
abuse. I also see people uh on
empetamines here in Southern California
where I uh reside and where I work. We
we have quite a bit of that and uh
temperance. If if you want to live a
long and wholesome life, there are some
toxins that you want to avoid. And uh
and and understanding that is really
important. So this is something that if
you stop some of those things that we're
talking about, all of those links are
going to be improved.
Air seems kind of obvious. Early on, I
used to think that that what this meant
was getting pure air with absolutely
nothing in it except for just nitrogen
and oxygen. That's not true anymore. We
now understand that for you to have the
best type of air, it actually has to
come with some things in it. Just like
our our gut has a microfllora that you
may have heard about, so too does the
air that we breathe also must have that.
And um the best type of air that you can
have is actually outside.
Rest. This is really interesting because
we just mentioned that exercise was a
pillar, but rest also is. How can rest
and exercise at the same time be pillars
of health? And it really comes down to
knowing when to do what? Sleep, which is
also part of rest. So we're not just
talking about a daily rest when you go
to sleep. And and as a sleep physician,
I can tell you uh quite a bit. We have
lots of information about how long we
should sleep, the quality of sleep, some
of the diseases that prevent us from
sleeping. Sleep is so important. I can't
I I I couldn't overexpress it enough.
Not just a a daily rest, but um I would
also say and v and venture out. We can
talk more about this. A weekly rest.
>> A weekly rest.
>> What do you mean weekend? Like
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Absolutely. How many times do we
uh even on the weekend do we put down
our our phone?
>> Never.
>> Or we stop reading emails and we take
the time out to do things that we would
never be able to do. Finally, trust. So,
this is something that really just can't
be ignored. And and I'll say this
upfront that um
in the world of research and science
there is a there is a silo of science
and there is a silo of faith. But what's
what we can't ignore is the growing body
of evidence from the scientific world
that's peeking over and looking at faith
that people who have faith and people
who have faith in God uh whether that is
uh their God in in that particular
denomination are better apt and able to
deal with stress and depression and
anxiety. So this is something
scientifically that has been shown. Now,
if you you may have noticed that I I did
these in a particular order. Um, and if
you go through them, you've got
nutrition, you've got exercise, you've
got water, you've got sunlight, you've
got temperance, you have air, you have
rest, and finally you have trust. You
put that together and it spells out new
start. So interestingly these these
particular topics are not copyrighted
but there is a um there is a university
in Northern California called Weimore
University that is actually put these
together in that very pattern as called
it new start they actually have a new
start program um and so this is
something that uh that is actually being
used uh internationally. So, of these
subjects that you just went through
there for this new start um framework,
where do you want to start?
>> I think actually sunlight is is one of
those things where I'm excited about all
of those, but I think sunlight is is
really where we have it's the let's put
it this way, it's the lowest hanging
fruit.
>> Okay. Explain to me why sunlight is the
the place where your focus is at the
moment.
It's a long trip that has gotten me to
that. Um, and I and I think part of it
has goes through right through COVID.
>> So, as a critical care intensivist, when
I heard that there was this virus that
was coming, they all told us that it was
going to be people with respiratory
illnesses, which I was certainly
comfortable with, but that's not what it
turned out to be. We certainly saw
people with respiratory illnesses, but
what we saw in the intensive care unit,
the people that were dying around me
were people with obesity, people with
heart disease, people with kidney
disease, people with dementia, people
with chronic diseases. And it made me
think, why was that the case? All of
those things have one thing in common
and many other things, too, but
specifically they're rooted in something
called mitochondrial dysfunction. So,
let me unpack that for you. And and this
has to do with longevity. This has to do
with aging. This is a huge topic that is
now just emerging. And we're we're now
finding more about this. So, when we
were when I was in high school biology,
when I was in college, uh we all learned
about this little organel in all of our
cells except for red blood cells called
the mitochondria. And and I have to say
it, what is the mitochondria? It's the
powerhouse of the cell, right? So, it's
the thing that makes energy. What we
didn't know at the time is that as we
get older, the output from these
batteries in our cells drops by about
70%.
>> Can you imagine running your house on
70% less energy? How fundamentally that
would change change what happens in your
house? Like you could not run the
laundry the same way. You could not run
the microwave and the laundry at the
same time.
>> And what does that look like in terms of
symptoms?
>> Excellent question. Because what it
looks like is depending on the cell type
that we're talking about, that's going
to have the issue. So, if we're talking
about the liver, the liver is going to
get more fatty. If we're talking about
the heart, the heart's going to is going
to become more congested. If we're
talking about the brain, it's going to
have more dementia.
>> And so, what's what's happening here is
that as we get older, the batteries in
our cells are not working the same way
as they used to. Metabolism is slowing
down. And and so, these are these are
huge issues. And all of these diseases
that I just talked about, all the ones
that we saw in COVID, if you look in a
lot of these diseases, they are rooted
in mitochondrial dysfunction. So the
question is is why is that the case and
what can we do about it? So there was a
paper that came out in 2019
that fundamentally changed the way I saw
this. It was written by um Russell
Writer who is the uh executive editor of
Melatonin Research. It's a he's out of
University of Texas and Scott Zimmerman
who's a light engineer and what they set
forth was to show that basically
sunlight is made up of so many different
types of wavelengths. You've got
ultraviolet on one end which of course
makes vitamin D and it's very
beneficial. It it's the type of light
from the from the sun that is very
shortwave and but cannot penetrate very
deeply. Let me let me back up a little
bit and explain. You pull up to a stop
sign and somebody pulls up next to you
and they're playing the latest hiphop
music. How does that sound to you in
your car? It's very boom boom, right?
>> Yeah. And muffled.
>> It muffled. And the reason why is
because low wave frequency
has the ability to travel very far. Go
to the Grand Canyon and there's a
thunderstorm at the other end of it.
What do you hear? It's like a rumbling.
And then as it gets closer you hear the
higher pitch sounds. This is a
fundamental physics uh principle. And so
when the sun is is shining there's very
short wavelengths ultraviolet B involved
in vitamin D. But at the other end
there's this infrared light which we'll
talk about or red light. It's very long
wavelength and it can penetrate very
very deeply. That's very important
because what we're talking about is the
human body. And if the sun is going to
have an effect on the human body, it's
got to be more than just the skin. So
that's exactly what what this paper
showed is that basically infrared light
from the sun is able to penetrate
probably up to about 8 cmters according
to Scott Zimmerman in this article. And
it fundamentally interacts with
specifically the mitochondria. And what
does it do to the mitochondria? So let's
let's back up and talk about the
mitochondria because this is central.
The mitochondria to the cell is like the
engine in your car. The engine produces
locomotion that causes this the wheels
to spin. But in the process of doing it,
it causes heat to uh surround the
engine. And if you don't deal with that
heat, it will shut down the engine. It
will make it more inefficient and
eventually it will shut it down. So what
do all internal combustion engines have?
They have a cooling system. They have a
radiator. They have a an oil pan. they
have a water pump and that's exactly
what the cell has to have for the
mitochondria. It's not heat in the
mitochondria. It's called oxidative
stress and it's specifically oxidative
stress that causes destruction and uh
and um yeah destruction of the
mitochondria and leads to these types of
diseases. So oxidative stress causes the
mitochondria not to work well. This
leads to diabetes. Oxidative stress
makes the mitochondria not work so well.
This leads to dementia. So there's this
has already been laid out. This is not
that controversial. The controversial
part is what do we do about it? So what
these guys in this paper showed was that
and and not just them but look reviewing
the literature is that the mitochondria
makes its own cooling system and that
cooling system is melatonin.
Now you might be thinking wait a minute
melatonin isn't that the isn't that the
stuff that we take that our brain makes
right before we go to sleep? Yeah that
you're it's absolutely correct that's
what happens.
The problem is is that this is not
melatonin that's made in the brain. This
is not melatonin that goes through the
blood supply and goes goes through our
blood and tells us it's time to go to
sleep. This is melatonin that's made in
the cell in the mitochondria and it's a
powerful antioxidant that basically
prevents the oxidative stress from
occurring.
What Scott Zimmerman and Russell Writer
showed in proposed in this was that
basically the infrared radiation that's
coming in to the body is able to
stimulate and upregulate melatonin and a
number of other factors that keep the
mitochondria cool and can actually
improve the energy output of the
mitochondria.
So, this is this was actually
mind-blowing to me. And I'll tell you
why I resonated with this as a critical
care physician because there was two
things that bothered me the most. Number
one,
SARS KV2 virus when it comes into the
body, it interacts with something called
the A2 receptor. You may have heard
about the A2 receptor. Okay, this is
where the the virus actually latches on
to the cell and gets internalized. So,
what is this A2 receptor? Is this was
this there for all of humanity just to
be a receptor or does it actually have a
role? It turns out it actually has a
role and mind-blowingly
the A2 receptor is involved in
mitigating oxidative stress.
So in other words, it's another part of
the cell's cooling system for the
mitochondria.
What what's happening is that the the
virus when it attaches to the cell is
basically eliminating that action. And
so imagine you have a bunch of people
with various different engines running
at different temperatures. In other
words, you've got some people with
chronic disease and we know their
engines are running hot. We have other
people who are completely healthy and
they're doing quite well. Their engines
are nice and cool. They have no problems
at all. Now imagine COVID comes and SARS
KV2 is infecting everybody.
What that h tendency is to do is because
it's knocking out everybody's A2
receptor which has the ability to cool
down the engine if in other words it's
causing everybody's engine to run hot.
Right? So but in somebody so in other
words picture this way you're you're
you're driving along in your car and
your thermometer is there and all of a
sudden there's this big hill that you
have to climb called CO 19. who's going
to make it over that hill and who's not
going to make it over that hill. The
people that make it over the hill are
those with great cooling engines whose
temperatures are running great. The ones
that don't make it over that hill are
the ones that have the thermometer on
their engine running hot.
>> Those are the ones that poop out at the
top and can't make it. And they're
they're the ones pulled over to the side
of the road with the hood up and the
steam coming out of the out of the
engine. Do you understand what I'm
saying? Of course. So, this makes
perfect sense to me why I wasn't seeing
what they were predicting, which is
these respiratory patients coming into
the ICU. Who was I seeing in the ICU? I
was seeing people with dementia, as we
talked about, diabetes, kidney disease.
These are the ones that were that that
were sick. The other thing that that
really hit me and resonated with this
was and this was this was not even
controversial. We knew early on in the
pandemic that people who came into the
hospital and had higher levels of
vitamin D did really well. They didn't
die.
They they didn't have the same chances
of dying. People who had low vitamin D
levels, they had much higher levels uh
chances of dying. So, we would check
these vitamin D levels. And so, think
about this. You're you're there at
ground zero and you're taking care of
these patients and you see this data
over and over and over again that
vitamin D is very predictive of who's
going to die. Obviously, what are you
going to do? Even though this is an
associative study, that association
doesn't mean causation. You're going to
be giving people vitamin D and try to
get those levels up.
The problem is is that we gave vitamin D
and it really didn't have much of an
effect. So
>> you gave it in supplement type.
>> Yeah. When people would come into the
hospital like this.
>> Exactly.
>> Exactly. Just like that. In fact, I was
supplementing myself. I mean, what have
you got to lose, right?
>> I already took my vitamin D uh tablet
this morning. I don't there's not that's
very hard to overdose, but it's
possible. So, you noticed that it was
hard to treat people with vitamin D, but
giving them a a tablet didn't really do
much.
>> That's correct.
>> Why?
>> Well, this is what I believe is the is
the is the fact is we saw that people
with high levels of vitamin D or normal
levels of vitamin D did better than
those that had low levels. I believe
that that was a marker of something
else.
In other words, people who had higher
levels of vitamin D meant that they were
out in the sun more. they were outside
more than those that people that had
very low vitamin D levels. The people
with low vitamin D levels were telling
me these are people that were not
getting outside into the sun. And so
what's the real factor here? What's
doing the heavy lifting? And I would
propose and Scott Zimmerman and Russell
Ryder would propose and I I can tell you
a number of other scientists that would
agree with me on this is that infrared
radiation from the sun is causing an
effect at the mitochondrial level in
terms of oxidative stress and that
vitamin D was just the marker of who was
getting the infrared light and who was
not. Who was going outside and who was
not going outside. So when the sun is
shining, for the most part, you're
getting infrared light. You're getting
the entire the entire biological
spectrum from the sun. We can go to the
longest wavelength, which is far
infrared, all the way to the shortest
wavelength, which is ultraviolet B,
okay? Which makes vitamin D. So in other
words, when you are outside in a natural
environment, you're getting a very broad
spectrum of light. And so because of
that, if you're getting infrared light,
you're also going to be making vitamin
D.
>> Yeah,
>> you're getting both. Um,
now that can change because in the
wintertime
when the sun is lower in the sky,
especially, you know, in England, this
is this is a special issue at that
latitude. When the sun is low in the
sky, it's got the light has to penetrate
through obliquely through the
atmosphere. And because of that,
shortwave
radiation from the sun like ultraviolet
B does not make it very well. So there's
times of the year where you're not
getting enough ultraviolet B or maybe
even no ultraviolet B from the sun,
>> which makes the vitamin D
>> which makes the vitamin D and that
you're going to be deficient. You need
to supplement. However, during that same
period of time when you're not getting
enough vitamin D because there's no
ultraviolet B radiation, that sun is
low, but that's it's still enough to
allow that long wavelength penetrating
infrared light to still come through.
>> So, is the longwave infrared light the
type of thing that we see these gadgets
doing?
>> Absolutely. And and uh I would say just
to be specific is because you can see
that as red light there that's not
infrared light because you can see it.
So infrared light technically is
completely invisible.
>> But this these do give out infrared
light but you just can't see it.
>> Exactly. So it's toward that red end of
the spectrum. And people like Glenn
Jeffrey out of UCL is actually doing
research at 670 nanometers of red light
and has shown in randomized control
trials that that type of light right
there at 670, the type that you can even
see actually does improve mitochondrial
efficiency. He's shown this in a number
of randomized control trials. It
improves eyesight and and you have to
realize that the retina at the back of
your eye is very rich in mitochondria.
He's shown this in terms of managing
glucose and and output from
mitochondria.
And and the reason why these things uh
work so well is because what's going on
here is as you get older, your skin
starts to become more saggy because the
the fibroblast or the cells in your
skin, they're designed to make collagen
and collagen is the skeleton that makes
your skin soft and subtle. Yeah.
>> Don't mind me, please.
>> No, no. So this is this is exactly my
wife uses the same thing.
>> This is a fun charge one.
>> So what what's going on right now is
that red light which can penetrate very
deeply down is going into the skin and
it is activating the mitochondria in
your fibroblast to produce more energy
which those cells need to deposit
collagen. And so when you deposit
collagen that's going to give the skin a
more tight uh feel because as you get
older that collagen deposition is going
to get less and less and less. So, this
is going to help keep me looking young.
>> That's the whole point of it.
>> And you're saying that the the light in
these penetrates what six or seven
centimeters or is it
>> infrared does about 8 cm? Uh, this red
light would be a little bit less because
this light light obviously you can see
it. So, it is a little bit shorter
wavelength, but yes, this light, the red
light can penetrate deeper than for
instance yellow light or blue light. And
it's this light particularly that
interacts with the mitochondria to
increase that.
>> So, should we be putting this all over
our body? because okay, it's good for my
skin, but if it's penetrating deeper,
presumably there's other parts of my
body that would benefit from that,
another mitochondria.
>> It's interesting you say that. Um the
the the study that I'm referring to with
Glenn Jeffrey out of University College
London, he took uh young people in this
study, he gave them a a bunch of glucose
and everybody who gets a bunch of
glucose should have a spike in their
blood sugar in he randomized them on
their backs to see what would happen
when he shined red lights uh on their
backs. And the people that got the red
light had lower spikes. In other words,
it seemed as though the mitochondria
were metabolizing faster, which caused
less of a spike of the glucose in their
blood. The way he confirmed that is
looking for the byproducts of the
mitochondrial metabolism, which is
carbon dioxide. So, when we breathe,
when we metabolize, we're breathing out
carbon dioxide, which is the result of
of a mitochondrial um metabolism. And in
fact, in those people that had the light
on, it showed a higher level of carbon
dioxide in the exhaled uh breath. The
whole point of that is to get back to
your question is whether we should be
putting this all over your body. He was
able to get that effect systemically
with just putting the light on the back.
Um that was a that was a systemic uh
ability. But we don't understand
everything about the mitochondria, but
what we do seem to understand is that
they can communicate with each other and
that you don't need to have this all
over the body to have systemic effects.
In this particular case though, if you
want to have the skin here to be more uh
you know, younger looking, then it makes
sense that this is where you need to
have it. If you want to have a
particular other part of your body to
look younger, then then perhaps that
that's where the light needs to go.
>> So interesting. How long did it take in
those studies to see the effect of red
light therapy like this?
>> Well, that's a very good question. If
you talk to Glenn Jeffrey, which I have,
he noticed a an improvement in 15
minutes.
>> 15
>> 15 minutes.
>> What did he notice in 15 minutes?
>> He said he has studied the mitochondria
in fruit flies, in mosquitoes and bees,
and in human beings, and it's the same
every time. He says after about 15 to 20
minutes of this type of light in that
type of setting there is a switch that
turns on and it and you and you don't
need further stimulation. Further
stimulation doesn't do anything more.
It's a it's a very bizarre thing. You
would think that the more light that you
gave the more the effect would be. It's
not. After about 15 minutes it it
there's something that changes in the
mitochondria.
There are certain theories about where
this might be. This might be in the
electron transport chain uh uh complex
4. Uh these are very technical things.
There's a lot of studies that are
actually there's a number of groups that
are actually looking at this. Uh there's
a whole area of science called
photobiomodulation which is looking at
this. But 15 minutes is really what it
takes. So we're not we're not talking
about a long period of time.
>> This is really really interesting. So
getting back to my
experience in the intensive care unit,
the vitamin D wasn't working. These
patients were dying and it became clear
to me that COVID was a metabolic uh
issue for these patients. By the time I
had realized this,
the s I mean the pandemic arguably is
still going on because people are still
becoming infected, but the rush to come
into the hospital and and the number of
bodies that we were seeing circulating
through the intensive care unit had
dropped dramatically.
And at that point, I was able to
see that potentially infrared light may
be very very beneficial in these
patients with CO 19. Now, there was a
study in Brazil. They took COVID
patients that were that were sick enough
to be admitted to the hospital, but not
too sick to be intubated in an intensive
care unit. And they did something
tremendous. They actually manufactured a
jacket that they could put on patients.
And on the inside of this jacket were
these LED bulbs that gave off infrared
radiation at exactly 940 nanometers.
They put the jackets on and they
randomly randomized the sign which
jacket was turned on and which jacket
was turned off. It was blinded because
the light coming from this jacket could
not be seen by the human eye. It wasn't
even enough to produce enough heat. And
so they they did this on 30 subjects and
they randomized them. 15 did it 50 all
15 or all 30 had the jackets on. 15 had
it turned on. 15 did not have it turned
on and they watched them. what happens
to these patients?
Every single endpoint that they looked
at was statistically significant. And
>> what does that mean?
>> It means that the differences between
these two groups could not have been
from chance. There was a real
difference.
The group that had the jacket turned on
had improvement in their oxygen
saturation,
had could take breaths in more deeply
and stronger, had improvements in their
blood, white blood cells. um and not
only that had improvements in their
heart rate, their respiratory rate, all
of these statistically significant, but
the most important and mind-blowing
statistic was the length of stay in the
hospital. So, they had these jackets on
for 15 minutes once a day for 7 days.
In the group that did not have the
jacket turned on, their average length
of stay was 12 days in the hospital. For
those that had the jacket turned on, it
was 8 days. That was 4 day difference.
That's tremendous when you realize that
it costs thousands of dollars
to hospitalize patients. It's it's a
huge amount when you think about the
fact that there are certain drugs that
get FDA approved for influenza, for
instance, by just cutting short the
symptoms for 24 hours. This is not just
24 hours, 40. people were discharged
from the hospital 4 days faster. When I
saw that study, that was enough for me
to convince me. I mean, obviously, it
was 30 subjects, right? We should do a
bigger study. We should do a hund a
couple hundred, right? That would be
that would be ideal to do. But the fact
that with just 30 patients, they could
show statistical significance. That was
enough for me to say every patient from
now on that I see that comes in with CO
19 that's hospitalized that they're
asking me to go intubate to bring to my
ICU, these patients are going to get
outside. I don't have that jacket that
they made in Brazil. I I I don't even
know how I would make that jacket. They
made it for the study and it's not
commercially available. There's no 940
nmter light, which is what they did in
the study. But I do know this. I do know
that sunlight has 940 nanometers in it
and if I could just take these patients
outside
maybe they could improve. So I had I got
my wish. I had a patient on the floor.
He was on 35 L a minute 100% oxygen
through his high flow
>> through his nose
>> through his nose barely barely
saturating because he had CO 19. And uh
I was asked to go see him because he was
potentially needing to be intubated or
brought to the intensive care unit. I
could not believe it because I had not
seen one of these in months. So I went
down, walked into the room, opened the
door. It was in isolation. I had a mask
on. The whole nine yards. The room was
completely dark. The blind was closed.
His daughter was there and the first
words out of his mouth to me was, "Doc,
how much time have I got?" I mean, it
was a catastrophe. Like there was no
light, no circadian rhythm. This guy was
depressed.
I immediately called my respiratory
therapist, immediately called the charge
nurse. We got everybody together and I
said, "We need to get this guy outside."
It was a bright and sunny day. How are
we going to get this guy outside? 35 L,
100%. We, my respiratory therapist, Kim,
managed to put a couple of oxygen tanks
together and we were able to get this
guy into a wheelchair and we wheeled him
outside.
And uh he told me this uh weeks later,
but he says, "You know, that first day
that you got me outside in the sun," cuz
we did this for like 7 days in a row. He
said, "That felt so good." Um he after
just one day dropped down from 35 L to
15 L.
>> 15 L of
>> of oxygen and then down to 12 and then
down to eight the next day and then down
to five. 5 days
>> the amount of oxygen he was inhaling to
keep him alive.
>> Correct. So in other words, we were
titrating down the amount of oxygen that
we had to give him to maintain a
saturation in the '9s. In 5 days, he was
discharged home without oxygen.
Now, obviously, that's an anecdote,
right? That's not a study, but I'm
looking at the risks of getting people
out in the sun for 15 20 minutes.
There's not a lot of risk to that. And
if there's a benefit, I thought it was
worthwhile doing. We we need to have
larger randomized control trials. But it
got me down the road to looking to see
what what was it about sunlight
that was affecting this change. And you
know what? There was there's there's
ample data there. There was a study
actually that was done in in Europe
where they looked they said, "Okay,
here's CO CO's going up. When does CO go
up? Is it because of temperature that
changes? Is it because of humidity?" And
the answers to both of those were no. Do
you know what predicted when countries
were to have their first surge in the
autumn of 2020? There was a study that
was actually done on this. It was
latitude. It started in Finland and then
really went down the entire continent.
The last country in the in the autumn of
2020 to have a COVID surge was Greece.
So a as the sun is literally pulling
down into the southern hemisphere, as
the shadow starts to go over Europe,
that's when we start to see CO surges
one by one by one. There was Yeah.
>> Is is that because CO and the sun aren't
friends? So if I it makes it harder to
spread because, you know, if I put CO on
this table and then I put sunlight on
the table, the CO is going to die.
>> Yeah, it it's possible. Uh although we
now know that CO probably doesn't spread
too much through contact. it's it's more
of an airborne thing. So there there was
a a study that was done out of
University of Edinburgh and they looked
at this very question that we had talked
about earlier about vitamin D. They
looked at the United States in the in
the wintertime. So and they eliminated
the southern part of the United States
because in the southern part of the
United States you can actually get some
vitamin D in the wintertime. So they
just looked at the sort of the northern
portion of the United States and they
were able to show that the more sunlight
there was in particular areas the lower
the mortality from CO 19. So they said
this is interesting. What about in
England? So they they did the exact same
study in England and and sure enough of
course they didn't have to eliminate any
part of England because the whole
country doesn't get any vitamin D in the
winter time. What they showed was that
again certain parts of the country in
England as you know get more sunlight
than other parts. Well those areas that
got more sunlight had lower mortality
from CO 19. Then they took the same they
predicated the same uh study and they
looked in Italy
exactly the same finding and they
published this and they said in their
study and this is what really amazed me.
They said the fact if this is causal,
they say they said that um this might
actually show a possible public health
intervention. The fact that it is
completely independent of vitamin D
means that there's something else going
on.
>> There was a study in 2011 in Sweden.
>> Yes.
>> Is that linked to this?
>> No, this is a completely different
study. But that that's also a very
important study. So the Swedish study is
is is groundbreaking. Um this was a
study where they asked 20,000 20 to
30,000 Swedish women about their habits
in sunlight. And they divided these
women into three categories. Those women
that did not get a lot of sun, those
that got a moderate amount of sun, and
those that got a lot of sun. And they
followed them for 20 years. And they
they kept a track of each one that died
and what they died of. And when they
were done with that, they were
astonished because what they found was
that the women who had spent most spent
the large amount of their time outside
or that spent the most amount of time
outside had the least amount of
mortality from cancer, from
cardiovascular disease and
non-cardiovascular disease. And those
that spent the least amount of time
outside had the highest levels of that.
The magnitude difference between those
two was so much that they were able to
show that women who in Sweden who spent
the most amount of time outside and
smoked
had the same mortality as those women
that did not spend as much time outside
and did not smoke.
>> They were equal.
>> They were equal. In other words, being
in that category of not spending much
time outside in the sun was the same
risk factor for death as smoking.
>> How do they know it wasn't linked to
exercise? How are they able to establish
causation? Because that's a
>> you're absolutely that's an excellent
question. So the the difference here as
you go up is this is a this is an
association study. Okay. So the question
is is how can you get causation from
association? You can't. But if you look
at the Bradford Hill criteria, there is
a way that you can potentially make a a
strong argument for causation if there's
something called a dose response curve.
In other words, if you can show you're
not just comparing two things, but
you're comparing three or more. If you
can show that as you increase the
variable that there is a change in the
the output, that is strongly suggestive
of potentially causation. By the way,
this is exactly what we did to show that
smoking causes lung cancer. Obviously,
we can't do a randomized control trial
here. You get to smoke, you don't get to
smoke, we'll follow up in 20 years to
see who has lung cancer. This is exactly
what we did. We showed that that there
was such a strong association with
cancer risk with smoking that we were
able to say through association that
smoking causes lung cancer. By the way,
Richard Weller, who's a dermatologist in
England, uh did just last year a very
similar study as to the Swedish study,
except it was 10 times bigger, and he
did it with both men and women. He found
the same results.
It was a UK bioank study.
>> What did he discover? He discovered that
either from from solariums or from um or
being outside using solar radiation
data, uh he was able to show both on
their their questionnaire and also where
they lived that the more light that they
had the lower their risk of of of um
mortality uh and um and cancer
mortality. So the question was does it
increase melanoma?
>> What's melanoma? Melanoma is is a skin
cancer. So that's the big risk. That's
the big risk that everybody's concerned
about. You go out into the sk sun and
you're going to get skin cancer. And he
was able to show in that study, this was
like three three 400,000 people in this
study, UK bioank study, Richard Weller.
He was able to show that there was no
increased there's no statistical
increased risk of melanoma incidents but
there was a reduction in non-skin cancer
mortality.
Okay. So, so here's the trade-off. If
you want to go out into the sun in
England, okay, the benefits are you're
going to have a reduction in non-skin
cancer mortality.
>> So, everything other than skin cancer.
Correct. On the other hand, there's no
increase in melanoma incidents. So, that
caused him to write an a an op-ed and
publish it. And actually, you can look
up this oped. It's a great op-ed uh
published in a um in the journal of
investigative dermatology called
sunlight, time for a rethink where he
goes through the arguments and he's
actually shown and and there's been a
number of changes that people have
around the globe. So public health uh uh
organizations that are saying now you
know before we have said that you know
the the sun is a deadly laser
and you should avoid it at all costs. We
may need to rethink that.
>> So are you telling me that essentially
15 minutes in the sun every day turns on
a switch in my body that improves my
mitochondrial function which is going to
impact a variety of different parts of
my health. Is that essentially what
you're saying?
>> Essentially yes. uh and and and we're
we're looking and this is in an
environment where where we are spending
less and less and less time to give to
give you to put in perspective if we
were on a British ship 300 years ago and
I came to you and I said do you see this
little yellow fruit just by eating a
little bit of this yellow fruit all of
this disease that you're seeing around
you with your fellow shipmates is going
to go away that that would seem almost
incredulous right
>> but that's exactly the case
>> we we are the scurvy of the 21st century
is the lack of sunlight.
Everything is inside. Uh we we avoid the
outside. We avoid discomfort. We avoid
high temperatures. We avoid low
temperatures. We are we used to go out
and play sports. We now are are playing
virtual sports on on pads. We have
windows that are specifically designed,
especially here in Southern California,
to eliminate infrared light because why?
infrared light comes in and it heats up.
One of the interesting things, we didn't
mention this about infrared light is the
way that we interact with infrared
light. You can you can tell this on your
own. You go outside and close your eyes.
You can tell which side of your body the
sun is on. And the reason is is because
that infrared light not only can
penetrate through your body, it's also
penetrating through clothes very easily.
And you can feel that that that heat
that you're feeling is the infrared
light going through the going through
the clothes, going through the skin and
interacting with your heat receptors
that are well below the surface. Um, so
all of this
>> right guys going to go get Steve. The
guest is here.
>> Ready?
>> Come in.
>> Oh my god. Steve,
>> what are you doing?
>> This is uh the Bontage face mask. It's
good for blemishes, wrinkles, uh, clears
up the skin. It's red light. Have you
not used it before? No,
>> tried this before. It's um it's really
really good. It's shines red light on
your face which helps increase and boost
collagen production. Actually found it
out because of the misses. Seen her
wearing it. She terrified me a couple of
nights in a row. Um I thought it was to
scare people with but actually it's
really really good for your skin. So
they are a sponsor of the podcast and uh
I've been using it every day for about a
year and a half now.
>> Wow.
>> You're glowing.
>> Well, Steve, it's great.
>> Yes. And Bonchard ships worldwide with
easy returns and a year-long warranty on
all of their products. So, visit
bondcharge.com/diary
for 25% off on any product sitewide, but
you have to order through that link.
That's bondcharge.com/diary
with code diary. Whether you are a
novice or you've been in the tax and
bookkeeping industry for years, if you
want to work with an experienced team of
professionals who are invested in your
learning and growth, there's a real
career opportunity with our sponsor,
Intuit, the maker of Turboax and
QuickBooks. Their self-paced training,
Intuit Academy, presents you with a
pathway to gain the necessary skills
that you'll need to feel confident
expanding your career within tax and
bookkeeping. And their team is extremely
supportive, too, with a large network of
experienced, credentialed professionals
right by your side as you learn and gain
experience. On top of all of this
upskilling, they also offer flexible
working schedules, whether that's
full-time, part-time, virtual, on-site,
or even letting you select your hours to
grow at the pace that you want to grow
at. Intuit is currently growing their
network of tax and bookkeeping
professionals. So if you want to build a
career with them on your own terms, just
head to intuitit.com/expert.
I'll put that on the screen. That's
intuitit.com/expert.
How long does the average American spend
indoors or the average Brit spend
indoors?
>> Good question. They're almost identical.
Uh I think the Brits spend a little bit
more time outside than Americans. the
the the last number for Americans was
93%.
And uh Brits is 92%.
>> Were we born to be outside?
>> I think so.
>> You'd think our ancestors probably spent
a huge amount of time outside.
>> Yeah.
>> And if you think about when I say
outside, that also brings into play a
number of other of the new start letters
that we haven't talked about. Uh
exercise, you're much more likely to do
good exercise outside. You're much more
likely to get air. That's that's the
right type of air outside. The other
aspect about infrared light briefly
is that trees are highly reflective of
infrared light. In other words, if
you're in an environment where there are
trees are present, you're going to get
much more of this beneficial infrared
light than if you're in a concrete
jungle. So, so, so plants like this, in
fact, the way that we measure the the
forestation of the Amazon is through
satellite imaging that looks at infrared
light because it reflects infrared light
back. So, the best thing best situation
to be in is to be outside on a green on
a day where where there's lots of green
trees. We we've known for we've known
for decades that people who live in
green spaces do much better in terms of
diabetes, do much better in terms of
hypertension, mortality, all of these
things.
>> Depression,
>> depression, all of these things. Yeah.
And and when you think about this, um
you you bring up a point in terms of of
of correlation. How do we know it's not
depression? We used to say, well, people
who live in green spaces have more
money. The people have they have more
access to things. Maybe that's what
we're seeing. I just have to tell you
the study. There was something called
the green heart study in south
Louisville, Kentucky. They did an
amazing thing. They took this four
square mile area in South Louisville,
Kentucky, urbanized uh area
and they measured everybody's uh HSCP.
What is HSCP? Highly sensitive C
reactive protein. It's a marker of
inflammation and it's been correlated to
bad things like stroke and heart attack.
So if you have high levels of of CRP,
that's not good. So they measured every
they measured about 700 people. And then
they did something extraordinary. They
purchased 8,000
mature trees,
dug holes, and planted 8,000 trees into
four square mile area. And these are
trees with leaves on them. Two years
later, they come back and they measure
all 700 people in their study. repeat
the HRCP
dropped by 13 to 20% which correlated to
about a 10 to 15% reduction in strokes.
These people didn't change their
socioeconomic status. They didn't
institute an exercise program. And so
really it kind of shoots in the heart
the idea that the advantage that we see
with green spaces has to do with
something else that we're not measuring.
I actually believe that we'll talk about
fresh air too that things like these
plants
but much bigger. This is kind of like a
bonsai plant but but trees outside they
actually have a benefit. And what they
represent again is these things that
don't leverage the other parts of your
body in in terms of the chains uh that
make all of the chains bigger because
they're they're they're having a
benefit. But you can't get the benefit
of this if you're inside a house.
>> So, what should we do about this in
terms of how what changes should I make
in my life to capitalize on this? Um,
this is a this brand here is called Bon
Charge. They do these these red light
devices. They do like red light sauners,
blankets, um, masks. They're actually a
sponsor of mine because I I started
wearing this and I think they they found
out and I started wearing it because of
my girlfriend.
>> Yeah. She was wearing it every day and I
got curious and so I as I always do, I'm
always super skeptical.
>> Sure.
>> So I went on online and started looking
at some of the research and I was
shocked.
>> Yeah.
>> It made no intuitive sense to me that a
a red light mask or any like red light
device could have a profound like what I
see as a profound impact on my health.
Like I didn't believe it. Yes.
>> To start with it was like woo woo stuff.
To me,
>> I couldn't disprove it. Right.
>> All the studies, many of which you've
referenced, um supported that it was
having a profound impact. And as I've
said on this podcast before, my
girlfriend's always right. She's like
always ahead of the curve, always right.
So I started wearing her mask and now I
have my own from Bon Charge.
>> Yeah. Do you recommend these kinds of
things? I
>> I think it's reasonable to do I I will
say this. Um if you are getting enough
infrared light from the sun, what we
find in studies, not particularly with
the mass, but we find in other things is
that these these other areas don't have
as much efficacy. It's almost to say if
you're on a ship with a bunch of people
with scurvy and you already have a diet
that's rich in vegetables and fruits,
eating an extra lemon is not going to be
that beneficial.
>> So, what do you do?
>> Like a lot of doctors do, we have shifts
that go from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. So,
you're in the hospital, you're not going
to get outside. So, at lunch, I try to
get outside as much as I possibly can
into the sun for my 15 minutes.
>> What if you live in a cloudy country?
>> So, that's a good point. uh clouds
because they are water molecules will
absorb a lot of the infrared light. And
the problem is is that that's the
exactly the type of light that you want
to get. However, even on a cloudy day,
being outside, you're going to get more
infrared light than if you were inside.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So, I still get the light I need
when it's cloudy, but I just don't get a
lot.
>> Yes, exactly. Is there anything I can do
to get if it's super cloudy and I know
I'm going to be indoors,
what do I do then?
>> Yeah. So, the light the type of lights
that we have inside
>> like these ones
>> like these uh and and and actually I
think the UK and the United States are
very similar in this regard is that we
really can't get the old incandescent
bulbs where on LED or or fluorescent.
And if you think about what they've done
in terms of of these bulbs,
the old incandescent bulbs used to give
you a very broad uh uh spectrum. So all
the way from, you know, just near blue
all the way down into the into the
infrared. The way that they've made the
bulbs more efficient, they said, "Hey,
let's stop using energy to give off this
light that we can't see and give a very
narrow spectrum of light that we can
see." So, think about what they've done.
They have for the first time in the
history of humanity, they are now we are
now being exposed to light in a very
narrow spectrum without anything else.
Whenever in the history of of humankind,
when we'd light a candle, when we would
go outside into the sunlight, when we
would have a kerosene lamp, we were
getting full spectrum. In other words,
we were never getting blue light without
red light. Now, we're starting to get
blue light without red light. So,
>> so do I change my bulbs? It's difficult
to do that because you can't pick up in
uh these incandescent bulbs. Which
brings me to I mean at least at least in
the United States we have laws now that
outlaw the regular selling of
incandescent bulbs because of energy
efficiency. Oh yeah.
>> I'm on Google now and I've typed in
incandescent bulb.
>> So there's something called a general
service lamp which is what the type of
bulbs that you could plug in. But if you
decide you want to get a a bulb that you
put into your microwave or a bulb that
you would do into a a type of
chandelier, that's a special type of
chandelier, those are still available.
You can still get incandescent bulbs for
those.
>> What about these kinds of bulbs? Is that
an incandescent bulb?
>> That's a uh that is a that is an
incandescent bulb. Again, for these
special type of lights, but I'm I'm
talking about the light like the like
the the good oldfashioned A90, I think
it's called, or light bulb that you just
screw in. Those are are the 120 watts.
Those are getting more difficult. You
It's harder to find. You can't go down
to your Home Depot and and find them
there. So Glenn Jeffrey um and this is
this is a preprint that he is he's done.
He actually took people
with that were working in this
environment with LED bulbs. He's
actually uh it's not peer-reviewed. It's
not published yet, but it's a pre-print.
It's available on the internet. So I'm
not speaking out of class. And what he
did with 22 people is he switched out
these LED bulbs and put in uh
incandescent bulbs. And there was a
there was 25% improvement in in color
differentiation in his study.
>> What does that mean?
>> They were able to distinguish colors 25%
better than they were when they were
exposed to LED LED. When I say LED
bulbs, these are the bulbs that are high
on the blue end.
Um, so why would that be? The retina,
which is the back of your eye, where the
light is coming in, there's these cones
that are tremendously metabolically
active. They're constantly updating,
sending neuro signals to the brain. And
there's a it's the it's the one tissue
in your body with the most amount of
mitochondria. And it's because they have
to supply a lot of energy. As somebody
gets older,
that mitochondria is not producing the
same amount of energy. And so the the
ability of the energy that those cones
have to draw on to do their work is
less. And so they're not going to do the
job. As well, if you can perhaps
increase the the uh the amount of output
of energy from those mitochondria, you
could improve the the the be ability to
visually perceive. and and and uh uh
Glenn Jeffy's done this study already
where he for just 3 minutes 670
nanometer light very similar to that
mask in the eye only in the morning
improved
those people's ability to to to to
visualize and actually see
>> and what does that mean for the broader
picture of our house
>> they they would be able to distinguish
colors better and actually improve their
vision that's basically what it means um
and so the question goes back to the
first question that you had at the very
beginning of the podcast, which is what
is the effect of low energy output from
the mitochondria? Well, it depends on
what tissue the mitochondria is in. And
so, if it's in the eye,
then it's going to be better visual
perception. If it's in the brain, it's
dementia. If it's you see, you see what
I'm saying? So, what we start to see is
we start to see that a myriad of
different diseases are affected by the
sun. I I challenge anyone to do this. If
you look at a publication in the United
States, I've seen it where they map out
the amount of deaths per in a calendar
day, cardiac disease, respiratory
disease, kidney disease, uh pneumonia,
um all sorts of diseases, infectious
diseases, non-infectious diseases, you
will see a very clear pattern.
The maximum amount of deaths every year
occurs within a month after the shortest
day of the year.
So we're talking December, January.
We see the most amount of influenza
deaths at that time. We see the most
amount of cardiac deaths at that time.
We see the most amount of kidney deaths
at that time. So you might ask, well
that that's because uh that's because
people get together at Christmas time
and they spread the germs around more
and we have Thanksgiving in late
November here in the United States and
and and and that's what's going on. The
problem is is if you look at Australia,
which is on the other end. So when is
their longest day of the year? Their
longest day of the year is in December.
and that's when they have the least
amount of deaths despite the fact that
they're all getting together for
Christmas in December. So that doesn't
fly. It's exactly the opposite. The most
amount of deaths occur in Australia in
the southern hemisphere in June to July.
That's their winter. And so what you see
is deaths are correlated to the length
of the day. This is the reason why
whenever they have to whenever they show
you deaths in the year, they always have
to seasonally adjust it. And the length
of the day is a proxy for the amount of
sunlight.
>> Absolutely. You're much more a you're
much more likely to get sunlight on the
longest day of the year than the
shortest day of the year. Especially
when and and this is well known there
there are some months especially in
people who are doing shift work like 7
a.m. to 7:00 p.m. There's literally like
December and January you will not see
the sun because you are going off to
work before the sun gets up and you're
you're coming home after the sun is long
set. So you're not you're not able to
see the sun and so you could go
literally weeks without seeing the sun
at all.
>> Is there an optimal time of day to get
sunlight?
>> Yes. So optimal time of day to get
sunlight would be for those that are
concerned about getting damage from
ultraviolet radiation. As we talked
about, when the sun is low in the sky,
that's going to be beneficial because
the ultraviolet cannot penetrate
obliquely through the atmosphere as well
as long wavelength radiation. So, when
the sun is coming up,
>> so in the mornings,
>> in the mornings and when the sun is
going down in the evenings, that's going
to be the time where you're going to get
proportionally more infrared light and
the least amount of ultraviolet light.
Now, when the sun is directly overhead
at noon, you're going to be getting the
most amount of infrared light at that
time, but you're also going to be
getting a lot of ultraviolet radiation.
And so, if you're not someone that's
gone out into the sun a lot, you may
want to avoid this period of time. Or,
as we talked about, put on a broad rim
hat, put on clothes, I mean, more
clothes because, as we said, ultraviolet
light does not penetrate through clothes
very well, but infrared light can. Does
it matter where the sun is hitting on my
body?
>> Shouldn't.
>> So, if I go outside and I'm wearing a
big hat, it's obviously going to cover
my eyes, my face. Yes, it'll be hitting
my legs.
>> For the purposes of we're talking about
with the mitochondria, it will not
matter. However, if we're talking about
circadian rhythm, if we're talking about
uh getting the circadian rhythm, that
pathway is through the eyes. So, you
want to maximize light through the eyes.
Yeah. So, so this type of a light is
called the satellite. So, your question
has to do with what part of the body
does it need to touch? So or need to be
uh touching. So for the effect of the
mitochondria and and the metabolic
effects, it it should not matter. Okay.
For this type of a light though, what
we're looking at is circadian rhythm.
And that's a that's a completely
different system that we're talking
about. That's not mitochondrial. That
has to do with the internal clock that's
in your brain that is regulating when
all of these things in your body
happens. And this light is about 10,000
lux. Flux is a way of measuring the
brightness of light. And what studies
have shown is that when you shine this
type of a light into your eyes, it had
it's the way of adjusting your circadian
rhythm, you know, if you if you have a
clock and it's not set to the right
time, there's a little thing at the back
that you can pull out and you can change
the time.
>> Yeah.
>> That pulling out and and changing the
time about when things happen in your
body is affected most by light. And
light can actually shift it one way or
the other depending on when you're
shining that light. If you're shining
the light in the morning time, and this
is what a lot of people do is they'll
use these these what they call SAD
lights. SAD stands for seasonal
affective disorder.
These lights, especially in the morning,
have a way of of not only setting your
circadian rhythm and making sure it's on
track, but also reducing depression.
There's a there's a portion in your
brain that receives light information.
It's called the perihabenular nucleus.
It's a long name, but it's it's it's
back there. And if it doesn't get
stimulated, it can cause depression. And
so, so for people who live at high
latitudes, uh, further away, closer to
the poles, where the sun is getting up
very late in the morning, they're
already off at work inside, this can
actually be very beneficial. So, what I
would recommend doing, you can pick
these up pretty cheaply on Amazon for
about 20 bucks, but they should
generally be about 11 to 16 in from your
face. And uh what people should be
getting is about 3,000 lux hours. Uh and
what I mean by lux hours is you multiply
the lux times the amount of hours that
you're wearing it. So, 3,000 is where
you ought to be. Because this is 10,000
lux, you only have to look at it for
about a third of an hour or 20 minutes.
and that should be enough.
>> So, is this a replacement for going
outside?
>> It's a replacement for going outside
because of the fact that you're living
at a very high latitude and the sun is
not up and because of the job that you
have, it's going to uh it's going to
have that effect. But realize that this
will not replace the effect that the sun
has on your mitochondria. This is only
to affect the effect that lack of
sunlight has on depression.
>> Okay? So, what if I'm looking at the sun
out of a window?
>> It depends on the window. So you're not
still the window is going to be reducing
the amount of luck. So I would not
recommend if you can I would not
recommend I would not say that staying
inside looking out the window is the
same as going outside. That's number
one. The other thing that you have to
understand is a lot of these windows
especially if they're modern windows
will be specifically designed to reduce
infrared light.
>> I want you to give some me any
information you have as it relates to
light health.
>> Yeah.
>> That will improve my life. Things that I
can act actionably do tomorrow.
Obviously, one of them is that I'm going
to go outside and make sure I get some
sunlight, ideally in the morning.
>> Yes,
>> we talked about this SAD lamp
>> for people especially that live in
certain countries which which have less
sunlight. Correct. To set their
circadian rhythm and to help with things
like mental health. Is there anything
else I should be thinking about or can
do or change?
>> Yes. So, just like we had in our
pneummonic of new start, rest and
exercise both at the same time and that
yet they're sort of like opposite of
each other. It's important to have
darkness.
>> Okay?
>> It's important to have darkness. And
this is a real issue. This is one of the
biggest issues is the fact there was a
study that was published recently and
the title was dark days and bright
nights. And that correlated with uh
increased mortality.
>> That's how most of us live.
>> That's the problem. We have dark days
and we have bright nights. And what we
really should be having is bright days
and dark nights. So, just as important
as it is to have bright sunlight and
getting outside in the middle of the
day, we also need to start working on
getting darker nights as well.
>> And how do we do that?
>> Turning things off. Uh getting these
screens away from our eyes. Um these are
really important because the screens
have a lot of light and the light,
what's going on here, this is the reason
why it's important. There's two reasons
actually is the light that's going into
our eyes is is doing two things at
night. Number one, it is shutting down
melatonin production from the pineal
gland. And as we just talked about,
melatonin is a very powerful antioxidant
that's very beneficial.
The second thing that it's doing is it's
confusing your circadian rhythm. You
see, your circadian rhythm is designed
to see light as day. If your if your
eyes are seeing light, your brain thinks
it's the day. So if it's 10:00 at night
and your eyes are seeing light, your
circadian rhythm is saying, "I must have
made a mistake. I thought it was 10
o'clock. It must not be 10 o'clock
because look, there is light. And so
what it's going to do is it's going to
adjust itself and delay everything
because it's saying, "Well, it can't be
10:00 at night. It must be 6:00." And so
therefore, when you would normally feel
tired and sleepy at 10:00 at night,
after a number of days of doing this,
you're not going to feel sleepy until
1:00 in the morning.
>> These devices we have, they spit out a
lot of blue light, right?
>> Yes. Is there a way to like turn that
off effectively?
>> Well, actually a lot of these come with
uh with with tied to the clock where
after a certain time of night, it will
shift its its uh spectrum to a more red
spectrum. So, it's giving you less blue
light. The problem is is that while the
sensor in your eyes are tuned more to
blue light, it's not just blue light.
So, really the solution, the best
solution is to turn off the light. The
next best solution is to have more of a
red shift where, you know, put these
glasses on at night. So, these are blue
blockers. They're trying to eliminate
blue, but I'm I'm still getting light
in. And that's enough light to shut down
melatonin production. So,
>> even with those on?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> But you're telling me these help?
>> They're better than not turning off the
light.
>> And you're saying I still get light in
because there's light coming over the
top. Even even that light there is still
going to bleed and uh it's going to
bleed into that part of the spectrum and
cause melatonin to be shut down. Yeah.
>> So it's just the eyes are the sort of
the barometer for
>> correct
>> what time of day it is.
>> Correct. And and the problem is is that
even when you close your lids,
light can still get through the lids.
>> What do you think of these sleep masks?
I think they're I think they're great uh
in terms of the fact that we now know
that closing your eyelids still can
allow some light to go in. So, if you're
in if you're sleeping in an environment
where, you know, light is out of your
control, if you're living in the city
and you can close your blinds, but
there's still light that's coming in,
these things could actually be uh very
beneficial. I don't recommend
nightlights in bedrooms.
>> You don't recommend?
>> I do not. Even even clock radios or air
conditioners with LED displays on them.
That's that's just like total light
pollution to your bedroom. Your bedroom
should be as dark as possible.
>> What if I have those lamps that don't
have blue light in them? Cuz I think my
girlfriend's put some of those by the
bed.
>> Yeah.
>> Do they are they still not great?
>> Again, the best thing is no light. The
second best thing is light with no blue
light in it. And then the worst is, you
know, blue light. What about candle
light?
>> That's interesting. Um, there was a
study that was done where they compared
someone reading at night with a book
with a light bulb shining on it versus
the LED uh, you know, like a Kindle or
whatever. Okay. What they found was that
there was a lot more light coming out of
the Kindle than there was just reading
the book with the with the lamp.
>> And it read and it delayed sleep onset.
So,
>> which delayed sleep onset?
>> The Kindle. the Kindle.
>> Yeah, it delayed sleep enough to
actually shut down actually delay the
circadian rhythm and shut down melatonin
production. So, the answer to your
question is is candlelight's great. The
only thing I'd be concerned about is
just the fire risk.
>> Yeah, because you fall asleep with that
thing.
>> Exactly.
>> So, the adjacent topic there was vitamin
D, which we we touched on a little bit.
Do vitamin D supplements work?
>> Oh, yeah. Certainly
>> they do work and they've tested them.
>> Yeah. There's a number of studies that
have come out. Uh Martino uh actually
published in the British Medical
Journal. This was back before 2020. Uh
it was a metaanalysis of randomized
control trials showed that people who
supplement every day with vitamin D had
lower risks of acute chest syndrome. The
other uh one there was a recent study
that came out that showed that people
who supplemented with 2,000
international units a daily of vitamin D
had a lower risk of all cause autoimmune
conditions. We're talking rheumatoid
arthritis, Crohn's disease, ulcerative
colitis, you name it.
Uh that that was a a study that came out
that we actually reviewed that on our on
our MedCram channel
>> because I've heard before in the past
that a lot of vitamin supplements we
take don't even get into our bloodstream
and into our bodies.
>> Yeah. So so vitamin D is very
interesting. Uh it is a supplement and
it is a vitamin but it's also a hormone.
>> Okay.
>> It's it's it actually manipulates um um
DNA production. So it's it is quite
interesting but these these are are
wellescribed randomized control trials.
So if you're looking at uh the
autoimmune condition this was actually a
study that was designed looking at
cardiac disease. They actually had two
arms one with uh omega fatty acids and
in vitamin D. And they showed that in
the vitamin D group there was a
statistically reduction statistically
significant reduction in autoimmune
conditions.
I supplement with vitamin D. And just
here's the the the here's the concern I
have is if you are going to supplement
with vitamin D, make sure that you get
your levels checked.
>> Why?
>> The reason is is because it is a fat
soluble vitamin and it is possible to
take too much.
>> What happens if you take too much?
>> It can affect uh calcium metabolism and
you can have issues with calcium uh too
high levels of calcium. It's very rare.
Um, but it can happen. And I don't mean
to say that in a sense that I would I
dissuade people from supplementing
because I think supplementation can be
good. But at at some point, you want to
get a level checked to see where you
are. The other reason is is because uh
based on your body habitus, based on
your skin color, because uh people with
darker skin, it's harder for them to
make their own vitamin D. They need to
be more time outside, especially if
they're at high latitudes.
>> So like me living in the UK.
>> Exactly. I need to be outside more.
>> It's going to be harder for you to make
as much vitamin D as as somebody who for
instance if you were living at a lower
latitude or if you had lighter skin.
Yeah.
>> What is vitamin D doing in my body?
>> Oh, good question. Lots of things. So,
vitamin D, if you were to look at the
the structure of vitamin D, actually I
actually did research on this uh
interestingly in college. I used to make
starting material for the graduate
students. It's it's a lipid soluble
molecule. And because it's lipid
soluble, it's able to go right through
into the nucleus and actually go onto
the DNA and uh combine with proteins
that actually affect the transcription
of your DNA. So in other words,
depending on which cell type we're
talking about, it can cause a lot of
interesting changes. So it affects
calcium metabolism. There's vitamin D
receptors on your immune system.
So it affects your immune system,
affects calcium metabolism, a whole host
of things.
>> My team did some research and found that
approximately 1 billion people globally
have a vitamin D deficiency
>> and about 50% of the global population h
has insufficient levels of vitamin D.
>> Absolutely.
Yeah. Yeah. So the the issue is is that
as the world becomes more
industrialized, as the world becomes
more welloff,
they're able to create dwellings and
they're able to air condition those
dwellings. And we as human beings tend
to avoid extremes. We don't like things
too hot. We don't like things too cold.
Well, I let's face it, in our cars, we
have something called climate control.
We can set the we can set the
temperature and that's what the
temperature is going to be. There's
there's other implications which we can
talk about in terms of hydrotherapy
perhaps if we get to that. But um the
issue is is we don't like those
extremes. We don't like going out into
the sun and when we don't do that we uh
we suffer the consequences.
>> Is there a way for me to get vitamin D
without supplementation and without
going into the sun?
>> Yes. Yeah. It's in certain foods as
well. Mushrooms for instance, uh certain
types of fish, they're um they they have
vitamin D in them as well.
This is a strange question, but do you
think our body knows
which foods we're deficient in? And
really what I'm saying there is if I'm
vitamin D deficient, do you think
there's a part of my body that knows
that I I need to eat mushrooms?
>> It's a good question.
>> And that makes me hungry for mushrooms.
>> I don't know about that particularly. I
can say this though. In people who don't
get enough sleep, we tend to have a
predilction to eating more carbohydrate-
richch foods. That one we do know. Okay.
>> And and we can and this is the reason
why people who this is the reason why
many scientists believe that people who
don't get enough sleep tend to have food
choices that tend to put weight on.
Every single one of you watching this
right now has something to offer whether
it's knowledge or skills or experience.
And that means you have value. Stand the
platform I co-own who are one of the
sponsors of this podcast turns your
knowledge into a business through one
single click. You can sell digital
products, coaching, communities, and you
don't need any coding experience either.
Just the drive to start. This is a
business I really believe in. And
already $300 million has been earned by
creators, coaches, and entrepreneurs
just like you have the potential to be
on Stan's store. These are people who
didn't wait, who heard me saying things
like this, and instead of
procrastinating, started building, then
launched something, and now they're
getting paid to do it. Stan is
incredibly simple and incredibly easy,
and you can link it with a Shopify store
that you're already using if you want
to. I'm on it and so is my girlfriend
and many of my team. So, if you want to
join, start by launching your own
business with a free 30-day trial. Visit
stephvenbartlet.stan.store
and get yours set up within minutes.
>> Of these cards that we have left in
front of us from the new start
framework.
>> Which one are you compelled to talk
about next?
>> Water.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So, tell me what you mean by water
because people will think, "Yeah, I
drink enough water."
>> Well, first of all, we I don't think we
do drink enough water. But I what what
everyone talks about, you know, the
internal use of water and it makes
sense, but as I was talking about
before, the the external use of water
can actually be very impressive and it
has to do with body temperature and it
has to do with the immune system. So
we'll talk about water, but let's sort
of set the framework for that
conversation. Your immune system is
broken up into two fa into two types.
There's the innate immune system and the
adaptive. We've become very familiar
with the adaptive immune system during
COVID because all of the talk was about
antibodies and antigens and the fact
that SARS KV2 was mutating and would the
vaccines that made antibodies against
them be uh still functional. All of that
where we have like where we literally
have a key with a keyhole that it fits
into and turns the lock and these
antibodies and they fit. That's all the
adaptive immune system. It's very
important, but it completely uh
eliminates or or removes from discussion
the innate immune system. The innate
immune system is really the body's first
defense. And what's happening there is
there's these cells that are
circulating, cells like monocytes and
natural killer cells and a number of
other other cells which scour the body
always looking for something that looks
foreign to it. and it can tell based on
the molecular patterns of these uh of
these uh invaders that they're not
supposed to be there and they should be
eaten up.
The major aector of this innate immune
system is something called interferon.
Interferon is a very important molecule
in the body and it is effective. It is
so effective at preventing viral
infections that just about every single
viral infection that plagues the human
body today has a defense mechanism
against interferon. It is it is a
prerequisite. There's no self-respecting
virus that can think that it's can
infect the human body without dealing
with the issue of interferon.
Period. Think about interferon as the
security guard at the bank. And if you
are want to rob a bank, you've got to
have a plan for how you're going to deal
with the security guard. Otherwise,
you're not getting the money. Does that
make sense? Yeah. So there was actually
an article that was published a couple
years ago where they talked about this
this battle between interferon and
emerging viruses and what viruses are
doing to try to get around interferon.
You may recall that back in 2002 we had
an outbreak of something called SARS
which especially was pretty bad in China
but also in Canada. The reason why we
were able to secure that outbreak was
because that everybody who came down
with SARS
developed a fever and so it was easy to
tell who those people were and and we
were able to hospitalize and isolate
them. The issue with SARS KV2 and indeed
many infections like the common cold is
that you don't necessarily get a fever.
And fever is really important. And
you're like what does this have to do
with water? We're going to talk about
this. Interferon
production goes up with temperature. And
in fact, the body's
fever mechanism is one of the ways that
it tells the body that it needs to
increase interferon to deal with the
viral infection.
>> Is that why you feel hot?
>> You feel hot. You may actually feel
cold. And the reason why you might feel
cold and even have chills is because the
way you feel is a product of what your
temperature is and what your thermostat
in your body is set to. So if your body
in your if your body's thermostat is
saying okay here we are at 986
or I guess in in terms of Celsius 37°
and you develop an infection the body's
going to say whoa we have an infection
and we need to increase the body
temperature. We're going from 37° or 986
up to 38° or or 100.4 because your
actual body temperature is below where
your body wants it to be, you're going
to feel cold. You're going to shiver to
try to increase that temperature. So,
you go up with that. Now, once the fever
is done and the infection is done and it
comes down, you're going to have you're
going to break a sweat. So, that's
that's why when someone, oh, he's
sweating, that means the fever is
breaking. That means your temperature is
coming down. So you typically you'll
feel cold, you'll feel like you're
shivering, you'll want to get into bed
and and and put the covers on and that's
when your temperature goes up. That and
and that's for a reason because what
happens when the temperature goes up in
your body is that creates an environment
where the virus that can't replicate
very well. All viruses really cannot
replicate very well at high
temperatures, including SARS KB2. It's
also a signal to your body to produce
more interferon. So there was a study
that was published uh last year where
they looked in mice which by the way
have the same body temperature as we do
and they found that there was like five
different regulatory proteins all of
which led to one end point and that was
to produce this thing called interferon.
All of them jumped in production when
your body went from 37
degrees to 38 degrees. That's basically
right below a fever, right? So, the
point, the take-home point that I got
from all of that was that we should not
really be treating fevers unless they're
so high that there's other complications
that could occur like, you know, uh
racing heart rates or or um or having
seizures. But we do this all the time.
We treat fevers because it feel makes us
feel bad and we think that by treating
the fever, we'll feel better. But what
we're actually doing is we're we're
cutting the legs out from our immune
system because part of the immune system
response is to generate a fever and the
and the fever generates interferon. Now
I I don't want to overstate this but
let's compare the innate immune system
to the adaptive immune system. The
adaptive immune system is pretty
specific for a particular variant of a
virus. And for a virus that mutates very
rapidly like SARS KV2 the immunization
may be very good in terms of binding but
if that that virus mutates that binding
is going to be affected in some way it
may not affect hospitalization but maybe
in terms of of preventing infection you
you understand what I'm saying so the
different variants we had the alpha
variant then we had the the delta
variant then we had omicron etc those
are material changes for the adaptive of
the immune system for the innate immune
system for interferon
>> it doesn't matter interferon is just as
effective against alpha as it was for
delta as it would be for omocrron so so
let's set this up again
water
we said that water has a very high
specific heat which means that if I
apply hot water onto the human body it's
able to transfer heat this is why people
can get burned with boiling
We don't obviously want to burn anybody,
but if we're able to put them into a
sauna, if we're able to put them into a
spa, if we're able to use hot towels and
apply to the human body to heat up their
body to cause a sweat, in other words,
if we're able to induce artificial
fevers in patients who have these
infections,
there seems to be evidence that the
interferon response will be will be
better. Uh there was a study that was
done looking at lymphosytes and taking
them out of the human body and at
different temperatures once it hit about
38 39 degrees there was off the charts
uh 10 t 10fold increase in interferon
which is exactly what you would want to
have. Now how do I know that interferon
levels are so important in things like
co 19? Well, there was a study that was
done that showed that high levels of
interferon
correlated with more mild
uh uh SARS KV2 infections and that
people that had low interferon levels
had very severe COVID 19 infections.
>> So, you suggesting that we should be in
the sauna more often?
>> Yes. And it's based on data that is
has been well documented in in the
Finnish sauna. uh um uh realm. So people
who use sauna
four, five, six, seven times a week are
more likely to have less uh death from
cardiovascular disease than people who
use sauna once a week. And and in
Finland, once a week is kind of the
standard.
>> And why do they say to do hot and cold
therapy together?
So they would uh I I would argue that uh
the reason why it has been argued to do
this and this goes back to uh a number
of papers that have been written back
over 100 years ago is what you're doing
when you're doing hot for a long period
of time let's say 20 minutes in the
sauna and what you're doing is you're
heating up the body and uh and and the
whole purpose of that is to increase the
body temperature. What the what the cold
at the end does is it does two things
they believe. The first thing that it
does is it causes vasoc constriction. So
you put a brief amount of cold onto the
body, it's going to cause vasoc
constriction superficially so that when
you're done, you're not going to lose as
much heat through those blood vessels
and so you're going to keep the core
body temperature higher for long, which
is exactly what you want to do. The
other thing that cold water does again
is the vasoc constriction. When you,
it's well known that when you take a
cold shower, your blood vessels
constrict. And when when you look at a
blood vessel on end in in a person who's
living and circulating, there are a
number of white blood cells that are
latched on to the inside surface of that
blood vessel. When that blood vessel
contracts, a lot of those white blood
cells that were stuck get kicked off
into circulation and they go off and
they do whatever it is that they're
going to do. It's called dearenation.
So, two things for cold right at the
end. doesn't have to be very long, maybe
just a minute. It causes uh actually to
keep your body temperature higher for
longer, ironically. And number two, de
margination.
>> So that's water, which is the W. Um, of
these,
which one do you want to pick next?
Which one do you find most compelling?
>> Let's talk about air.
>> Okay.
>> Uh, real briefly. So we said that air is
not just the lack of toxins but actually
benefits. So first of all we want to
have good oxygen. We want to get rid of
carbon dioxide especially in buildings
when there's no ventilation. That's not
good. But there's been actually a number
of studies looking at plants and trees
and the fact that they can give off
things like phitonides.
>> What's that?
>> These are are aromatic compounds that
the tree actually gives off. And when we
look to see the effect of these
compounds on the human body, they're
actually very beneficial. They interact
with our immune system and elevate our
immune system and it actually can make
us more relaxed. There's there's a lot
of data in the Japanese literature on on
this in the what they call the hanoki
cypress forests where they looked at um
these CEOs.
There's a podcast about CEOs. There's
these CEOs in Japan and they took them
from their their jobs and basically took
them up into the mountains of the Hanoki
Cyprus and had them walk around took
blood tests and they found that the
natural killer cells which are so
important in terms of immunity were not
only increased in number but they were
also the the um the the enzymes within
them that break down diseases and
viruses was also increased. So when they
brought them back down to uh the city in
Japan, they put them up in hotels and
they infused some of these uh these
chemicals, these um naturally produced
uh fites they're called, and they had
almost exactly the same effects in in
these uh in these uh subjects.
>> So you think plants and being out in
nature could actually be giving us much
more than just clean air. It's giving us
chemicals which help us fight disease.
>> Absolutely. So, so again, here's this
dichotomy inside versus outside. What do
you get when you're outside? We've
already talked about exercise. We've
already talked about uh sunlight and now
we're adding to it fresh air. Not just
the fact that you have uh low
pollutants, which is certainly very
important, but the fact that when you're
around green plants, when you're around
green trees, there could actually be a
benefit. By the way, the benefit that
they found lasted for about 7 days. So
just going out one day a week um can
actually have that benefit.
>> I think a lot about carbon dioxide
because obviously because I I spend a
lot of time sat in the studio recording
and um
>> this is our big LA studio but uh in the
UK it started in a really small room.
Yes.
>> And there wasn't air conditioning. And
obviously I sit here sometimes for
several hours with a guest and we're
recycling CO2 at that point.
>> Yes.
>> And then I read a couple of studies that
showed the impact that would have on my
cognitive performance and
>> that's all true. We actually had on our
on our channel uh with MedCram, we had
Dr. Joseph Allen out of the Harvard uh
public school of health. Um and he he
showed us I mean he literally had the
the CO2 meter and just by cracking the
window uh just a little bit allowed
carbon dioxide to escape and brought
down those carbon dioxide levels. So
very important. Absolutely. And for
people that work in offices or, you
know, travel in hotel rooms or are
inside a lot, what should they be
thinking about and how can they go about
making sure that the air quality is
optimal?
>> Well, uh, the surrogate for that is
carbon dioxide as we mentioned. So,
cracking open a window if they're able
to, if there's a door that they can, uh,
open up safely without, you know,
compromising security. These are all
things that, uh, would be very very
beneficial. even rolling down the window
uh in in uh in in the car and and maybe
taking making sure that we're taking the
uh the recirculation button off when
we're when we're driving.
>> I've got friends that won't won't stay
in certain hotel rooms unless the window
opens cuz you know in a lot of hotel
rooms especially ones that are high up
you can't open the windows. And there's
also a bunch of devices that we um in
our UK studio which is smaller
>> we found on Amazon for you know not
super expensive that we just sometimes
put on the floor in the studio just to
see
>> how we're doing. I'll link some of that
stuff on screen if anyone's interested
in getting seeing what the uh CO2 levels
are in whatever room you're working in.
>> Yeah.
>> What is uh what's next on your list then
here?
>> Well, we've talked about I mean
exercise, nutrition, temperance. These
are things that a lot of people talk
about. Not many people talk about trust.
>> When you say trust, you really mean
religious faith and
>> religious faith uh something that would
give you a a way of of dealing with uh
stress and and anxiety. That's really
where this comes down. There's been
actually a number of studies that have
looked at that. So, yeah, basically the
Bible um or it doesn't have to be uh the
Bible as well. There's there's other
faith um denominations that that look
into this as well. A number of studies
that have looked at trust in God and how
that relates to anxiety. So a number of
studies have shown that people who have
a good faith and trust in a god that is
uh or or in a religion that is
supportive and not nonsupportive can
they have less anxiety, less depression,
have a faith community that they can um
engage with and and be supportive. Um
and I think that that's that the
literature is uh where whereas you have
this the science behind that is not as
strict as it would be for like a
randomized placebo control trial.
There's a lot of associations that you
have to say here. Um that it certainly
is one of those pillars that I believe
helps with all of those links.
>> What do you think's going on there? So
you're telling me that from what the
literature is saying, people who have a
faith in a god
>> Yes.
>> are insulated from depression and
anxiety in some interesting way.
>> Yeah. That that's a question that a lot
of people have tried to answer and and
they believe that it comes down to if
you have a trust in in a God that is
looking out for you and is there on your
side. Uh then that type of a
relationship does lead is associate
let's say I shouldn't say does lead to
because that implies causation. Let's
say it's associated with a reduction in
depression, a reduction in anxiety
particularly. Um there's there is an
there are some uh studies that have been
done particularly in uh in Christianity
where there was a study that was
published this is Krauss and uh out of I
believe University of Texas where he did
a survey and he asked people how they
forgive and he he divi he basically
divided them into two different groups.
There were people that would forgive
conditionally and people that would
forgive unconditionally. Let let me put
it into practical terms. someone does
something to you and you say that's okay
I forgive you. The question is, would
you forgive that? There are some people
that would only forgive if that person
came back and and you know did some sort
of act of contrition like okay I'll
forgive that person they came back and
apologized or I'll forgive that person
they came back and they did you know
whatever it is that would be considered
conditional forgiveness.
The other type is unconditional
forgiveness. So in other words, someone
does something to you, you don't see
them again or or they've never expressed
any kind of, you know, being apologetic
for what they did, they still get
forgiven. So that's unconditional
forgiveness. What they found in the
study when they divided that is that the
people that forgave unconditionally
had less
depression. They had less feelings of
inadequacy. They had less anxiety
regarding uh end of life. they had they
had all of these uh they had more the
people that forgave conditionally
had more sematization of depression. So
these were real medical uh you know
things that they could actually diagnose
with surveys and and and tests that are
well validated and and what what would
decide between these two was how they
forgave. So they were puzzled by this.
They said well what well then what
determines whether or not someone is
going to forgive conditionally versus
unconditionally? So they looked at a
bunch of factors and none of them stood
out except for one and and the odds
ratio on this was like 2.5
and and it boiled down to this one
question. Do you believe that God has
forgiven you?
That was that was the major thing. If if
somebody believed that the God that they
had faith in had forgiven them, they
were two and a half times more likely to
to forgive somebody unconditionally,
>> which then meant
>> which then was associated with all of
these other things being low like less
depression, less anxiety.
So to me that that's an that's that's
fascinating that that in their minds
this is what's actually happening. And
so there have been randomized control
trials where they have when people are
doing therapy like you say have you have
anxiety there is cognitive behavioral
therapy that we can do for those people.
But what has been shown in a randomized
placeboc controlled fashion is that if
somebody is of a faith
and you inject into that cognitive
behavioral therapy aspects of that faith
the cognitive behavioral therapy is even
more effective.
So, I guess I should preface this by
saying I don't believe that any of this
stuff should be placed on people without
their permission. So, I'm working I work
in a healthcare environment. So, do I go
and pray for people who don't believe?
No. This is something that that always
has to be done has to be asked
permission. Do you think
>> people who believe in God are
healthier generally? All other factors,
>> it would seem the data would indicate
that
people who have a healthy relationship
with their church, who have a healthy
relationship in God are associated with
less disease.
>> Because from a causation point of view,
you could say, well,
>> causation. Yeah. So this this is what we
don't we
>> they probably have more friends. They
probably have.
>> Yeah.
>> So, the question is is whether or not
people who are healthier and have more
friends are more likely to be religious
or is it the other way around? And and
sometimes it's difficult to tell those
things.
>> But I imagine there's a great calming
force that comes from believing in a
higher power.
>> Absolutely. And the other thing that the
other thing that's interesting about all
of these like new start stuff is when
you look at other particular religions
how a lot of these things are actually
incorporated in this like for instance
the Hindus are very famous for getting
up in the morning and welcoming the sun
and we just talked about the benefits of
of sunlight. We didn't talk too much
about nutrition but fasting is is an
important part of that and and and
Muslims are are obviously um part of
their religion is actually doing fasting
during Ramadan. religions have hot and
cold practice as well, don't they?
>> Yes. Yeah.
>> At least through history.
>> And on the flip side of that, I would
say that it's also shown that if you
have a unhealthy relationship, like if
you have if you believe in a god who is
vindictive or who's out to get you or
who's going to do something to you
unless you do something else, that has
also been shown to be negatively
impactful.
So, it depends on the relationship that
you've got.
>> What do you see in your practice?
because you said something earlier that
you you're often there at the end of
people's lives.
>> Yeah. Some unfortunately sometimes I'm
the last person they see and and it's
you start to realize that you cannot I
mean that death is inevitable and all we
do in medicine is delay the inevitable.
So what we try to do and um and and I
have a colleague uh who's very
philosophical about this is we try to
make sure that when these things happen
that they happen with dignity and we
celebrate the person's life and and
making sure that it's done in the way
that they would want to have it done.
>> What do people say as they're about to
die? people become very it's very
different uh for for different people
but uh they can become very circumspect
and and uh I've seen such such contrasts
people are ready to go people feel like
they've they've done what they've come
to do
>> and uh they don't want anything further
to do like we're we're there to to to to
delay death right we're there to put
them on a ventilator or to give them
this medication and you would be
surprised people who are look you know
relative atively healthy but and
something is happening that we could
easily correct. They're like, "No, I I I
don't want that. I I I choose not to
have that." And we have to respect
obviously what they what they choose.
Obviously, we have to educate them to
make sure that they're making the right
choice. But once once they have given
all the information, ultimately they're
the one that makes the decision.
>> So you see people choose death.
>> When we can intervene in artificial
ways, they would rather not have that
and they would choose death. Yes.
>> Are there any particular cases that
changed you? Yeah. Yeah. There was
there's there was a case that changed
me, but not in the way that we've just
been talking about where was horrible.
This is this is actually a miracle. I've
actually seen a miracle happen. And for
me, it happened early in my training.
So, it it it made me think twice about
being a prognosticating physician.
>> A prognosticating physician.
>> Yeah. Saying, "Oh, you're never going to
walk again." Or or you've only got two
years to live. I I must have missed that
day in med school. I just didn't show up
that day. This was a young guy. He was
he had he had um uh testicular cancer
and uh he went to the operation. The
testicular cancer surgery was a success.
Unfortunately, during the operation uh
something happened. He didn't get enough
oxygen to the brain and he came out of
the operation with with an oxic injury
of the brain. Uh this guy must have been
in his 20s and uh he had a young wife.
Um and uh I had come on to the rotation
as a as a as a as a resident and uh we
had attendings and you have to realize
in medicine you have attendings above
you and what they say is just you know
that's that's the word that's what
happens and and the ICU attendant we
were the ones that were sort of taking
care of the patient because he was on a
ventilator but there was the neuro
neurologist who looked at everything and
says look this guy is not waking up he
has severe anoxic brain injury we've
looked at the scans this is what's going
to
And so, um,
every day we'd ran on this guy and he
was just he was just a shaking mess. He
was just there and he was just kind of
shaking. His eyes were rolling. No
response, nothing. And every day his
wife would come in, young wife, and she
uh she just didn't believe that this guy
was going to be like this for the rest
of his life. He was going to wake up
eventually. And so she he would she
would be at his bedside like attending
to him and making sure this that and the
other and even asking us to put you know
some special concoction that she made at
home into his tube feeding so that this
could go and help him make him better.
And we would we would go along with her
but I was looking into my attendings and
they're like she's she doesn't
understand what's going on. She doesn't
understand that he's never going to wake
up.
So this is this is what I'm seeing. Uh,
one day she came in and she and she just
had this smile on her face. She was just
so at peace and a smile and uh, they
were Hispanic couples. So, we had to ask
a translator what was going on. And she
told us, she said, um, I had a dream
last night. I had a dream that he was
going to come home.
And she was convinced,
just absolutely happy, beaming. And
we're like, man, this lady is is crazy.
she doesn't understand what's going on.
Well, days went on, weeks went on, and
uh one day uh and where I was rounding
it was it's just in this round nursing
the nursing stations in the middle and
the doors to the rooms are all around in
a periphery and we were going around the
circle rounding on the patients and I
could look in and I saw him and he was
kind of shaking but he was kind of
opening his eyes and I said, "He seems
to be focusing a little bit. His eyes
seem to be focusing a little bit more
than they would be. And he kind of I I
just said I just kind of put my hand up
like this. And I just kind of And sure
enough, he put his hand up like this,
shaking, and he put it back down again.
I'm like, "What?"
>> He waved at you.
>> Yeah. What?
And I said, "Let's go check this out
again."
Long story short, took months,
but that guy walked out of that
hospital.
6 months later, he and his wife came
back, walked onto the unit like like
there was nothing wrong with the guy,
and he gave us a big basket of flowers
to thank that unit for what they had
done for him. In my mind, I knew that
for most of that staff, for most of that
time, there people were just going
through the motions, keeping him alive
because that's what she wanted.
Obviously, when when there were signs
that this guy was recovering, it was it
was complete shift. People were amazed.
And so, what that did to me in my career
was it made me think twice like what why
did this guy get better? Now, he was 22.
So he was young and and typically if
something like that is going to happen,
it's going to happen in someone who's
very young, whose mind is plastic, who
can who can survive that type of a
situation,
but it really it was a miracle. I can't
I can't say anything else. I mean, it's
not something that we would nor All of
the experts said that this wasn't going
to happen, but it happened.
>> What do you think happened?
I think he had a loving wife who
believed in him and something happened
outside of the physical and the mental
maybe the spiritual I don't know
it happens it's very rare and when it
does happen it happens in young people
that would be what the medical part of
my brain would say but the other part of
my brain says you know what I only know
about 10% maybe 5% of the world's know
world's knowledge 1% of the world's
knowledge maybe I have 5 to 10% of all
of the medical knowledge in this world.
And I would say probably the explanation
is somewhere in that other 80 to 90%.
That I just don't know. I think what it
taught me was is that we have to be
humble about what it is that we know.
There's things that we know we know and
there's things that we don't know that
we don't know.
>> We talked a little bit about this
chemical earlier on melatonin.
>> Yeah.
>> I just wanted to close off because I had
a question on it. Um, a lot of people
take melatonin supplements at nighttime
to help them sleep.
>> Yes.
>> Good, bad, and different.
>> I think it's good in certain situations.
So, if you're having difficulty falling
asleep, a little tiny dose of melatonin,
no more than five milligrams, can be
actually very beneficial. If you're
wanting to shift your circadian rhythm
back instead of it being pushed back,
but you want it to be advanced forward,
melatonin can be very beneficial. It's
very beneficial for jet lag. It's also
beneficial for a few sleep diseases, but
I would not recommend routinely, for no
other reason, taking large doses of
melatonin.
>> What's the trade? You said earlier on
that everything has side effects, right?
And it impacts another part of
>> So, taking high doses of melatonin can
actually make you more irritable
>> and irritable.
>> Irritable. Yeah.
>> In what regard?
>> Just mentally irritable.
>> Yeah.
>> What does that look like?
>> Things set you off um more easily.
>> So, like a mood disorder.
>> Absolutely. Anything else with melatonin
that you're aware of?
>> Not that we have studies for. People uh
have concerns that sometimes taking too
much melatonin may actually affect the
melatonin secretion from the pineal
gland itself. I don't have evidence of
that as yet to see if that that's
actually the case.
>> Dr. Roger, is there anything else that
we haven't discussed that we should have
discussed?
>> We've discussed a lot. Um I think I
think putting it all together is again
the links and if we have those links
medications have their place but the way
that they work is by breaking down other
parts of the chain to strengthen the
weak chain that can have an effect
especially at the end of life if you
want to sustain life. But if you're
interested in longevity, if you're
interested in making and living the best
life, then you want to strengthen all of
those chains. And I believe the key to
doing that is something called new
start.
>> We have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're leaving it for. And the
question that was left for you is, what
is the area of your focus that you are
most dying to talk about which you are
almost never asked about?
this book, the Bible,
uh, which is my, uh, which is my
tradition,
evidence for
science in the Bible.
>> What do you mean?
>> This we what we've been talking about is
the body and the health in the body.
Um, I like to put to to the test some of
the statements in the Bibles to see if
they work scientifically,
>> like turning water into wine.
>> No. Well, potentially. Uh, that's a
miracle. What I was referring to is is
this. And this is what I've actually
done and it's actually quite interesting
is uh, you know, Paul who is one of the
New Testament writers in the Bible wrote
to the Corinthians. Don't you don't you
understand that your body is the temple
of the Holy Spirit?
I said that's that's a really
interesting statement.
How would he come to that conclusion?
Like what does that mean, the temple of
the Holy Spirit? So the only temple at
that time was the temple in Jerusalem
where they would have the sacrifices and
things. So what I did was I went back
and this is and this is answering the
question is I'm looking for evidence of
scientific truth probably unknowingly by
some of the writers in the Bible to see
whether or not there is truth. Does does
that make sense what I'm saying? So if
you look and most of Exodus 25 through30
is this painstakingly detailed
description of the sanctuary that Moses
built in the wilderness that he
supposedly he got from God. This is what
he says. So here's a great way to see
whether or not this this all fleshes
out. Moses is saying here's the
description of the pattern that I got
for the temple. And Paul is saying your
body is a temple. So here's my
hypothesis. If we look at the pattern in
the temple, should it match
the human body that they had no
understanding of at the time that Paul
wrote this? Like we didn't know about
cells until Van Leuen Hook in the 1600s.
We didn't know about the circulation of
the heart until the 1600s with um with
William Harvey. Okay.
Yet, if you look in the human body, you
have the blood system. You have blood
circulating around in the vascular
system and then it and then it goes into
the interstatial fluid and then the
interstatial fluid then goes to the cell
which is there's a there's a plasma
membrane on the cell that you can't
penetrate through but unless you
actually have the proteins to go and
then it goes into the cell which is a
compartment with two compartments within
it. Right? You got the cell and the
nucleus. Right? This is exactly the same
structure that Moses was given in in the
wilderness. And and by the way, uh Hindu
temples are actually similarly designed.
There's sort of this three-part
situation. So you have this altar of
sacrifice,
which is where the blood is. That's
that's the blood in the human body.
Next, you move to the labor, which is
this container full of water, and that's
the interstitial space. After you go
from the blood into the interstitial
space, any pharmacologist will know that
this is exactly the pattern that you
move to. The next thing that comes is
this structure that has a veil that you
can't penetrate through unless you you
go through it. That's the cell cuz this
the structure is the building and it's
got a room within a room. And that's
exactly what the cell is. The cell is
this nucleus surrounded by the
cytoplasm. Well, in this room that you
go into at first, there's pieces of
furniture in there that are very similar
to the types of organels that you see in
the in in the cytoplasm of the cell. For
instance, there's this seven branch
candlestick that's in there that's
burning olive oil and producing energy.
That's like beta oxidation producing
energy. That's exactly what you see in
the mitochondria. But the final thing is
you move into the nucleus. And this
temple has something called the most
holy place where there's this altar of
where where there's this arc of the
covenant. You've seen Indiana Jones,
right?
>> Yeah.
>> And and the first uh Raiders of the Lost
Ark, there's this ark and you open it up
and this is where the two tablets of
stone, the ten commandments rested.
So in that area you have two tablets of
stone
written by the hand of God the code of
life and according to Jewish and and
Christian belief that this is the law
and if you break the law that's how sin
is and the consequences of sin is
disease and death. Well, when we get to
the nucleus of the human body, you have
two strands of DNA. And on the strands
of DNA is the code, the nucleotides of
which is the code of life. If you
manipulate that code, that leads to
mutations, which leads to disease and
death.
None of this was known until 1950 when
they discovered DNA. And yet we have
Paul
who's making this jump and saying your
body is the temple of the Holy Spirit. I
just I just find that fascinating.
Nobody ever asked me about that. But
that's what as soon as you ask that
question, that's the first thing that
pops up. There's, by the way, there's so
many other places in in in the
scriptures where I see that alluded to.
Um it's fascinating. Paul Paul talks
about the body of Christ and how it's
one body, but it's made up of parts.
There's the hand, the foot. He didn't
know about cells, but that's exactly
what the human body is. The human body
is one body made up of many parts. Van
Leuenhook didn't discover that until the
1600s. We didn't have cell theory until
the 1800s.
So, this is it's interesting to me how
statements are made in ancient texts
which have scientific relevance far
below the surface. I just find that
interesting. Thank you so much and I
hope to speak to you again very very
soon and thank you for all the work
you're doing because you've made uh some
of these difficult scientific subjects
so unbelievably accessible. You have a
real art for
simplifying
and simplifying in a way that means that
millions of people uh you've got
millions of subscribers on your YouTube
channel, millions of people can access
this information which is often confined
within the walls of some academic study.
Yeah.
>> So, thank you for the work you're doing
because it's going to it's I'm sure it's
really had a profound impact on many
many millions of people's lives and I'm
sure my audience are deeply
appreciative. So, thank you so much,
Roger. I appreciate you.
>> Thank you, Stephen. Thank you for having
me on and having this opportunity.
>> Make sure you keep what I'm about to say
to yourself. I'm inviting 10,000 of you
to come even deeper into the Dire of a
CEO. Welcome to my inner circle. This is
a brand new private community that I'm
launching to the world. We have so many
incredible things that happen that you
are never shown. We have the briefs that
are on my iPad when I'm recording the
conversation. We have clips we've never
released. We have behindthe-scenes
conversations with the guests and also
the episodes that we've never ever
released. And so much more. In the
circle, you'll have direct access to me.
You can tell us what you want this show
to be, who you want us to interview, and
the types of conversations you would
love us to have. But remember, for now,
we're only inviting the first 10,000
people that join before it closes. So,
if you want to join our private closed
community, head to the link in the
description below or go to
daccircle.com.
I will speak to you then.
I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you.
[Music]